Explore
Search
Search...
NASA Logo

News & Events

Multimedia
NASA+
…
James Webb Space Telescope
Fact Sheet
Webb

News

Overview

Science

Observatory

Multimedia

Team

More
 
The James Webb Space Telescope (sometimes called JWST or Webb) is an orbiting infrared observatory that will complement and extend the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope, with longer wavelength coverage and greatly improved sensitivity. The longer wavelengths enable Webb to look much closer to the beginning of time and to hunt for the unobserved formation of the first galaxies, as well as to look inside dust clouds where stars and planetary systems are forming today.

Key Facts
Mission Goals
Instruments
Major Innovations
Key Facts















Key Facts
Launch Date	December 25, 2021 07:20am EST (2021-12-25 12:20 GMT/UTC)
Launch Vehicle	Ariane 5 ECA
Mission Duration	5 - 10 years
Total Payload Mass	Approx 6200 kg, including observatory, on-orbit consumables and launch vehicle adaptor.
Diameter of Primary Mirror	6.5 m (21.3 ft) approximately
Clear Aperture of Primary Mirror	25 m2
Primary Mirror Material	beryllium coated with gold
Mass of Primary Mirror	705 kg
Mass of a Single Primary Mirror Segment	20.1 kg for a single beryllium mirror, 39.48 kg for one entire primary mirror segment assembly (PMSA).
Focal Length	131.4 meters
Number of Primary Mirror Segments	18
Optical Resolution	~0.1 arc-seconds
Wavelength Coverage	0.6 - 28.5 microns
Size of Sun Shield	21.197 m x 14.162 m (69.5 ft x 46.5 ft)
Temperature of Sun Shield Layers	Layer 1:
Max temperature 383K = approx 231F

Layer 5:
Max temperature 221K = approx -80F
Min temperature 36K = approx -394F
Orbit	1.5 million km from Earth orbiting the L2 Point
Operating Temperature	under 50 K (-370 °F)
Gold Coating	Thickness of gold coating = 100 x 10-9 meters (1000 angstroms). Surface area = 25 m2. Using these numbers plus the density of gold at room temperature (19.3 g/cm3), the coating is calculated to use 48.25g of gold, about equal to the mass of a golf ball. (A golf ball has a mass of 45.9 grams. Note mass does not equal size!)
Mission Goals
Early Universe : Search for the first galaxies or luminous objects formed after the Big Bang
Galaxies Over Time: Determine how galaxies evolved from their formation until now
Star Lifecycle: Observe the formation of stars from their initial stages to the formation of planetary systems.
Other Worlds : Measure the physical and chemical properties of planetary systems, including our own Solar System, and investigate the potential for life in those systems
Instruments
Near Infrared Camera (NIRCam)
Near Infrared Spectrograph (NIRSpec)
Mid Infrared Instrument (MIRI)
Fine Guidance Sensors/Near Infrared Imager and Slitless Spectrograph (FGS/NIRISS)
Major Innovations
MIRRORS - Folding segmented mirror: The Webb Telescope team also decided to build the mirror in segments on a structure which folds up, like the leaves of a drop-leaf table, so that it can fit into a rocket. 
MIRRORS - Lightweight optics: NASA set out to research new ways to build mirrors for telescopes. The Advanced Mirror System Demonstrator (AMSD) program was a four-year partnership between NASA, the National Reconnaissance Office and the US Air Force to study ways to build lightweight mirrors. 
MIRRORS - Cryogenic actuators & mirror control: Lee Feinberg, Webb Optical Telescope Element Manager at NASA Goddard explains, "Aligning the primary mirror segments as though they are a single large mirror means each mirror is aligned to 1/10,000th the thickness of a human hair. What's even more amazing is that the engineers and scientists working on the Webb telescope literally had to invent how to do this."
MIRRORS - Wave Front Sensing: Wavefront sensing and control was developed to sense and correct any errors in the telescope's optics. This is essential to making the 18 mirror segments work together as a single giant mirror.
Webb's Sunshield: The sunshield reduces the temperature between the hot and cold side of the spacecraft by almost 600 degrees Fahrenheit in the span of its 5 layer, 4.8m height - from approximately 185F (85C) on the hot side to approximately -388F (-233C) on the cold side.
Sunshield coatings: Webb deployed a tennis-court sized Sunshield made of five thin layers of Kapton E with aluminum and doped-silicon coatings to reflect the sun's heat back into space.
Improved Detectors: Webb has extended the state of the art for infrared detectors by producing arrays that are lower noise, larger format, and longer lasting than their predecessors.
Micro-shutters: Microshutters are tiny windows with shutters that each measure 100 by 200 microns, or about the size of a bundle of only a few human hairs. The microshutter device can select many objects in one viewing for simultaneous high-resolution observation which means much more scientific investigation can get done in less time.
Cryocooler: Webb's MIRI instrument carries detectors that need to be at a temperature of less than 7 kelvin to operate properly. This temperature is not possible on Webb by passive means alone, so Webb carries an innovative "cryocooler" that is dedicated to cooling MIRI's detectors
Backplane: The backplane must carry more than 2400kg (2 1/2 tons) of hardware. It is required to be essentially motionless so the mirrors can see far into deep space. To meet this requirement, the backplane was engineered to be steady down to 32 nanometers, which is 1/10,000 the diameter of a human hair.
Cryogenic Data Acquisition ASIC: "A-to-D" conversion is nothing new, but the technical challenge that Webb faced was doing it at the observatory's super-cold cryogenic operating temperatures in an Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC).
NASA Logo
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NASA explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of humanity, and inspires the world through discovery.

About NASA's Mission
Join Us 
Home
News & Events
Multimedia
NASA+
Missions
Humans in Space
Earth
The Solar System
The Universe
Science
Aeronautics
Technology
Learning Resources
About NASA
NASA en Español
Follow NASA
More NASA Social Accounts
NASA Newsletters
Sitemap
 
For Media
 
Privacy Policy
 
FOIA
 
No FEAR Act
 
Office of the IG
 
Budget & Annual Reports
 
Agency Financial Reports
 
Contact NASA
 
Accessibility
Page Last Updated:
Aug 22, 2024
 
Page Editor:
Marty McCoy
 
Responsible NASA Official for Science:
Diana Logreira
